Whale
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Jump to navigation
Jump to search
This article is about a marine mammal. For other uses, see Whale (disambiguation).
For further information, see Cetacea.

Whale
An informal group within the infraorder Cetacea

Southern right whale
Scientific classification


Kingdom:
Animalia
Phylum:
Chordata
Class:
Mammalia
Order:
Artiodactyla
Suborder:
Whippomorpha
Infraorder:
Cetacea
Groups included
Parvorder Mysticeti (baleen whales)
Parvorder Odontoceti (partially)
Family Monodontidae (Arctic whales)
Superfamily Physeteroidea (sperm whales)
Superfamily Ziphioidea (beaked whales)
Cladistically included but traditionally excluded taxa
Family Delphinidae (dolphins and porpoises)
Superfamily Platanistoidea (Indian river dolphins)
Superfamily Inioidea (South American river dolphins)
Whales are a widely distributed and diverse group of fully aquatic placental marine mammals. They are an informal grouping within the infraorder Cetacea, usually excluding dolphins and porpoises. Whales, dolphins and porpoises belong to the order Cetartiodactyla, which consists of even-toed ungulates. Their closest living relatives are the hippopotamuses, having diverged about 40 million years ago. The two parvorders of whales, baleen whales (Mysticeti) and toothed whales (Odontoceti), are thought to have split apart around 34 million years ago. Whales consist of eight extant families: Balaenopteridae (the rorquals), Balaenidae (right whales), Cetotheriidae (the pygmy right whale), Eschrichtiidae (the grey whale), Monodontidae (belugas and narwhals), Physeteridae (the sperm whale), Kogiidae (the dwarf and pygmy sperm whale), and Ziphiidae (the beaked whales).
Whales are creatures of the open ocean; they feed, mate, give birth, suckle and raise their young at sea. So extreme is their adaptation to life underwater that they are unable to survive on land. Whales range in size from the 2.6 metres (8.5 ft) and 135 kilograms (298 lb) dwarf sperm whale to the 29.9 metres (98 ft) and 190 metric tons (210 short tons) blue whale, which is the largest known creature that has ever lived. The sperm whale is the largest toothed predator on earth. Several species exhibit sexual dimorphism, in that the females are larger than males. Baleen whales have no teeth; instead they have plates of baleen, a fringe-like structure used to expel water while retaining the krill and plankton which they feed on. They use their throat pleats to expand the mouth to take in huge gulps of water. Balaenids have heads that can make up 40% of their body mass to take in water. Toothed whales, on the other hand, have conical teeth adapted to catching fish or squid. Baleen whales have a well developed sense of "smell", whereas toothed whales have well-developed hearing − their hearing, that is adapted for both air and water, is so well developed that some can survive even if they are blind. Some species, such as sperm whales, are well adapted for diving to great depths to catch squid and other favoured prey.
Whales have evolved from land-living mammals. As such, whales must breathe air regularly, although they can remain submerged under water for long periods of time. Some species such as the sperm whale are able to stay submerged for as much as 90 minutes.[1] They have blowholes (modified nostrils) located on top of their heads, through which air is taken in and expelled. They are warm-blooded, and have a layer of fat, or blubber, under the skin. With streamlined fusiform bodies and two limbs that are modified into flippers, whales can travel at up to 20 knots, though they are not as flexible or agile as seals. Whales produce a great variety of vocalizations, notably the extended songs of the humpback whale. Although whales are widespread, most species prefer the colder waters of the Northern and Southern Hemispheres, and migrate to the equator to give birth. Species such as humpbacks and blue whales are capable of travelling thousands of miles without feeding. Males typically mate with multiple females every year, but females only mate every two to three years. Calves are typically born in the spring and summer months and females bear all the responsibility for raising them. Mothers of some species fast and nurse their young for one to two years.
Once relentlessly hunted for their products, whales are now protected by international law. The North Atlantic right whales nearly became extinct in the twentieth century, with a population low of 450, and the North Pacific grey whale population is ranked Critically Endangered by the IUCN. Besides whaling, they also face threats from bycatch and marine pollution. The meat, blubber and baleen of whales have traditionally been used by indigenous peoples of the Arctic. Whales have been depicted in various cultures worldwide, notably by the Inuit and the coastal peoples of Vietnam and Ghana, who sometimes hold whale funerals. Whales occasionally feature in literature and film, as in the great white whale of Herman Melville's Moby Dick. Small whales, such as belugas, are sometimes kept in captivity and trained to perform tricks, but breeding success has been poor and the animals often die within a few months of capture. Whale watching has become a form of tourism around the world.

Contents
1
Etymology and definitions
2
Taxonomy and evolution
2.1
Phylogeny
2.2
Mysticetes
2.3
Odontocetes
2.4
Evolution
3
Biology
3.1
Anatomy
3.2
Locomotion
3.3
Senses
3.4
Communication
3.5
Intelligence
3.6
Life cycle
3.7
Sleep
4
Ecology
4.1
Foraging and predation
4.2
Whale pump
4.3
Whale fall
5
Relationship with humans
5.1
Whaling
5.2
Other threats
5.3
Conservation
5.4
Whale watching
5.5
In myth, literature and art
5.6
In captivity
6
References
7
Bibliography
7.1
Books
7.2
Articles
7.3
Websites
7.4
News
8
Further reading
Etymology and definitions
The word "whale" comes from the Old English hwæl, from Proto-Germanic *hwalaz, from Proto Indo European *(s)kwal-o-, meaning "large sea fish".[2][3] The Proto-Germanic *hwalaz is also the source of Old Saxon hwal, Old Norse hvalr, hvalfiskr, Swedish val, Middle Dutch wal, walvisc, Dutch walvis, Old High German wal, and German Wal.[2] The obsolete "whalefish" has a similar derivation, indicating a time when whales were thought to be fish.[citation needed] Other archaic English forms include wal, wale, whal, whalle, whaille, wheal, etc.[4]
The term "whale" is sometimes used interchangeably with dolphins and porpoises, acting as a synonym for Cetacea. Six species of dolphins have the word "whale" in their name, collectively known as blackfish: the killer whale, the melon-headed whale, the pygmy killer whale, the false killer whale, and the two species of pilot whales, all of which are classified under the family Delphinidae (oceanic dolphins).[5] Each species has a different reason for it, for example, the killer whale was named "Ballena asesina" 'killer whale' by Spanish sailors.[6]
The term "Great Whales" covers those currently regulated by the International Whaling Commission:[7] the Odontoceti family Physeteridae (sperm whales); and the Mysticeti families Balaenidae (right and bowhead whales), Eschrichtiidae (grey whales), and some of the Balaenopteridae (Minke, Bryde's, Sei, Blue and Fin; not Eden's and Omura's whales).[8]
Taxonomy and evolution
See also: List of whale species and List of extinct cetaceans
Phylogeny
The whales are part of the largely terrestrial mammalian clade Laurasiatheria. Whales do not form a clade or order; the infraorder Cetacea includes dolphins and porpoises, which are not considered whales.[citation needed] The phylogenetic tree shows the relationships of whales and other mammals, with whale groups[citation needed] marked in green.
Laurasiatheria
Ferae
(carnivorans and allies)
 
Perissodactyla
(horses, rhinos, tapirs)
 
Artiodactyla
Tylopoda
(camelids)
 
Artiofabula
 
Suina
Pigs
 
Cetruminantia
 
Ruminants (cattle, sheep, antelopes)
 
Whippomorpha
 
Hippopotamuses
 
Cetacea
 
Archaeocetes (Ambulocetus, Protocetus, Basilosaurus)
 
 
Mysticeti
(right, grey, rorquals)
baleen whales
Odontoceti
 
Delphinoidea (dolphins, porpoises, beluga whales, narwhals)
 
 
Lipotoidea (river dolphins)
 
 
Physeteroidea (sperm whales)
 
 
Ziphoidea (beaked whales)
 
toothed whales
 
 
 
 
 
 
c. 53 mya
c. 99 mya
Cetaceans are divided into two parvorders: the largest parvorder, Mysticeti (baleen whales), is characterized by the presence of baleen, a sieve-like structure in the upper jaw made of keratin, which it uses to filter plankton, among others, from the water; Odontocetes (toothed whales) are characterized by bearing sharp teeth for hunting, as opposed to their counterparts' baleen.[9]
Cetaceans and artiodactyls now are classified under the order Cetartiodactyla, often still referred to as Artiodactyla, which includes both whales and hippopotamuses. The hippopotamus and pygmy hippopotamus are the whale's closest terrestrial living relatives.[10]
Mysticetes
See also: Mysticeti 
